Synopsis of the Treasury of Abhidharma

by Chomden Rigpé Raldri

Homage to Mañjughoṣa!

The Treasury of Abhidharma (Abhidharmakośa) has eight topics.[1]

I. Elements

Of these, the first is the elements. This has five parts: 1) the homage and pledge to compose,
2) an explanation of Abhidharma, 3) a statement concerning the necessity of explaining
these points, 4) a brief statement of the topics to be explained, and 5) a detailed explanation.

In the explanation itself, there are two main sections: the unconditioned and conditioned. The
conditioned has four parts: 1) explanation by means of names, 2) identification of essences,
3) presentation, and 4) divisions of the elements.

The identification of essences has two subdivisions: 1) explanation of each of the five aggregates,
and 2) how they relate to the elements and sources.

The presentation has four subdivisions: 1) summary, 2) literal definition, 3) set number and
so on, and 4) how other named categories such as the [Dharma] sections are included here.

The explanation of the divisions of the elements has several subsections, from the demonstrable
and non-demonstrable through to the faculties and non-faculties.

II. Faculties

The teaching on the faculties has four parts: 1) an explanation of the faculties, 2) how conditioned
phenomena arise, 3) an explanation of their causes and so on, and 4) the categories
of the mind.

The explanation of the faculties has six subdivisions: 1) their nature, 2) their types, 3) their
acquisition, 4) their relinquishment, 5) how they are obtained, and 6) how they are possessed.

How conditioned phenomena arise has three subdivisions: 1) how the physical arises, 2) how the
mind and mental states arise, and 3) an explanation of conditioned factors not associated
with mind.

The discussion of mind and mental states includes: 1) an explanation of each, and 2) an explanation
of various points such as how they arise in particular realms.

The discussion of the non-associated factors includes: 1) an overview and 2) an explanation
of each factor.

The explanation of causes and so on has three subdivisions: 1) an explanation of causes, 2)
an explanation of results, and 3) an explanation of conditions.

The explanation of categories of the mind has three subdivisions: 1) an explanation of the twelve
minds, 2) an explanation of the twenty, and 3) how the twelve are acquired.

III. Cosmology: Inhabitants and Habitat

The explanation of the inhabitants has five parts: 1) direct and indirect explanations of the
types of sentient being, 2) the types of genesis, 3) their actual attributes, 4) intermediate
existence by means of the two ways of entering the womb, and 5) the wheel of existence
and how death and transmigration occur.

The explanation of the wheel of existence has five subdivisions: 1) the nature of dependent
origination, 2) an explanation of ignorance and the rest individually, 3) illustrative examples,
4) the nature of existence, and 5) sustaining foods.

The habitative cosmos has three parts: 1) how it is formed, 2) how it abides, and 3) how it
is destroyed.

How it is formed has two subdivisions: 1) the formation of the underlying base, and 2) the formation
of the domains above.

How it abides has five subdivisions: 1) how the lower realms and heavens abide, 2) the extent
of the threefold universe, 3) the scale of beings’ bodies, 4) their lifespans, 5) the units
of measurement for these two, and 6) types of aeon. The latter has two subdivisions: 1)
the actual topic, and 2) how buddhas appear therein, etc.

IV. Karma

This explanation has three main sections: 1) a summary, 2) a detailed explanation, and 3) an
additional explanation based on terminology and so on.

The detailed explanation has three parts: 1) an explanation of perceptible karma, 2) an explanation
of the imperceptible, and 3) some categories of karma taught in the sūtras.

The imperceptible has four subdivisions: 1) its materiality as form, 2) an explanation of the
causes of actions and states and so on,[2] 3) types of imperceptible action, and 4) an extensive
explanation of vows. The latter has seven further subdivisions: 1) an explanation
based on the essence of vows, 2) how vows are obtained, 3) how negative commitments are obtained,
4) how vows are relinquished, 5) how negative commitments are relinquished, 6) how
neutral commitments and so on are relinquished, 7) an explanation of the supports for vows
and negative commitments.

The explanation of some categories of karma has seven subdivisions: 1) threefold categories,
2) the categories of corrupt action and white and black actions and so on, 3) tenfold categories,
4) wrong livelihood and its results, 5) the three obscurations, 6) how buddhas accumulate
merit, and 7) the three bases of merit.

The explanation of the threefold categories is further divided into: 1) actual topic and 2)
several further categories such as the experienced.

The explanation of the tenfold is further divided into: 1) an explanation of their nature, cause
and so on, 2) the essence of the ten non-virtuous actions, and 3) how they have potential
force.

The explanation of the three obscurations is further divided into: 1) the essence of the three,
2) the boundless crimes, and 3) the nearly boundless crimes.

V. Negative Tendencies

The teaching on negative tendencies has three parts: 1) the nature of the afflictions, 2) how
they are overcome, and 3) the wisdom that overcomes them.

The first of these has six subdivisions: 1) explanation of the categories of negative tendency,
2) an explanation of the universal and non-universal, 3) an explanation of their focus
and development, 4) sources and how they are possessed, 5) the substantiality of the three
times, 6) some further attributes of the negative tendencies. The latter has five further
subdivisions: 1) an explanation of abandonment and extension, 2) an explanation of the stages
of engagement and their causes, 3) an explanation of variety and literal meanings, 4)
an explanation of the bonds[3] and the subsidiary afflictions, and 5) the five obscurations.

VI. Paths and Individuals

This has three main sections: 1) an explanation of the truths, which are the objects of focus,
2) an explanation of the stages in which they are realised, and 3) an explanation of the
path that brings realisation.

The middle section includes the realisation of ordinary beings and exalted beings (ārya). The
first has two subdivisions: 1) how to practice meditative absorption preceded by study and
reflection, 2) how to cultivate wisdom through attaining meditative absorption. There are
four subdivisions to the path of the exalted: 1) the sudden attainment of those who have
entered the fruition, 2) an explanation of gradual attainment, 3) an explanation of the
possible forms of fruition, and 4) an explanation of some further distinctive characteristics.
This latter point has two further subdivisions: 1) an explanation of the four kinds of
fruition and how they are attained, and 2) how they degenerate and are perfected and so
on.

The third section, an explanation of the path that brings realisation, has three parts: 1) a
general explanation of the path, 2) an explanation of the thirty-seven factors of enlightenment,
and 3) an explanation of how obscurations are overcome.

VII. Wisdom

This has two main sections: 1) an explanation of the nature of the knowledges, and 2) an explanation
of the qualities of knowledge.

The first has three parts: 1) an explanation of acceptance and knowledge and various qualities
of view, 2) a summary of the application of mindfulness, and 3) how one possesses and acquires
knowledge.

The explanation of the qualities of knowledge has three parts: 1) an explanation of what is
exclusive to the buddha, 2) an explanation of what is shared with śrāvakas, and 3) an explanation
of what is shared with ordinary beings.

VIII. Meditative Absorption

This has four main sections: 1) a presentation of the concentrations (dhyāna) and formless absorptions,
2) an explanation of their qualities and attributes, 3) explaining the nature
of the teaching and requesting the acceptance for faults, and 4) concluding advice to disciples
who seek liberation.

The first has two parts: 1) the actual topic, and 2) an explanation of several features such
as how they are attained.

The section on the qualities has two parts: 1) an explanation of the immeasurables, and 2) an
explanation of the eight forms of release and so on.

Wishing to gain knowledgeOf all the topics of Abhidharma,Chomden Raldri set down thisAbhidharma
synopsis at glorious Tangchen.[4]

Samāptaḥ.[5]

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.