Topical Outline of the Prayer That Swiftly Fulfils All Wishes (Sampa Nyur Drupma)

by Patrul Rinpoche

First, before engaging in any form of listening and hearing, contemplation or meditation, one
should pray to the Precious One of Orgyen, inseparable from the lama, so that it will be
brought to a successful conclusion.

So first recall his life story and pray:

“Emaho! In the heart of a blossoming lotus, upon the waters of the lake,You are the deity who
is the spontaneous presence of the five kāyas and wisdoms,O great, naturally arisen Padma
YabyumSurrounded by clouds of ḍākinīs—to you we pray:Grant your blessing so that all our
wishes be quickly fulfilled!”

Second, invoke the promise and commitment:

“As a result of our negative karma, whenever we sufferFrom illness, malevolent spirits (döns)
and obstacles, warfare and violence, famine and starvation,Then remember your promise that
even simply to think of you will immediately dissolve all such suffering —O Lord of Orgyen,
we implore you, from the depths of our hearts,Grant your blessing so that all our wishes
be quickly fulfilled!”

Third, pray for the enjoyment of the causes and results of happiness and well-being:

“To practise devotion, discipline and generosity,To free the mind through hearing the Dharma,
and to have dignity, self-controlAnd discriminating awareness — make these seven noble human
qualitiesFill the hearts and minds of all sentient beingsAnd so bring peace and happiness
to the world.Grant your blessing so that all our wishes be quickly fulfilled!”

Fourth, pray to abandon the cause and effect of suffering:

“When oppressed by illness, suffering and unwanted circumstances,Falling prey to harm and obstruction
from negativity and demonic forces — jungpo and gyalpo,Threatened by fire, water
and journeys of great danger,When this life is spent and death arrives—at these timesWe have
nowhere to turn to except to you!Care for us with your great compassion, O great Orgyen
Guru:Grant your blessing so that all our wishes be quickly fulfilled!”

May there be virtue! By Patrul.

| Translated by Ane Tsöndrü, 2018. Root text courtesy of Rigpa Translations.